---
title: "Notes for video 1"
date: 2018-11-15
tags: [machine learning, ML4U]
header:
  image: "/images/icmc.jpg"
excerpt: "Notes on video 1 of the ML4u series (videos in Portuguese)"
--- 

This first video is very much a idea of what the channel will be about and a lot of interesting concepts are thrown around. Let's visit some of them and try to define them:

### Data Science
A catch all term that means a lot of different things to different people. Generally represents a interdisciplenary field, focused on applying knowledge from maths, statistics and computer science to real life problems.

In the past few years it has exploded in popularity due to the higher processing speed and data available, along with the development of machine learning techniques. 
 
Following every possible blog post and article on the subject, it cannot be mentioned without referencing it as "The sexiest job of the 21st century", as labeled by the [Harvard Business Review](https://hbr.org/2012/10/data-scientist-the-sexiest-job-of-the-21st-century).

In general, a data scientist is expected to interpret and apply machine learning concepts to real life data and problems. As a scientist, they should be able to critically access their problems and assumptions, bringing to the workplace a strong curiosity and desire to deeply understand their problem and solution.


Some related fields are also:

* Business Analysist - Focused on helping the organization itself more directly, making smart decisions and changes 
* Data Engineer - Focused on the infrastructure side of big data, expected to design and maintain the data architecture
And many more industry used terms such as "Data Analysist", "Business Inteligence", "ML Engineer", etc.

Further discussion:
* [What do machine learning practitioners actually do?](https://www.fast.ai/2018/07/12/auto-ml-1/)
* [Data Scientist vs Data Engineer](https://www.datacamp.com/community/blog/data-scientist-vs-data-engineer)
* [SDS 187: How Data Science is Becoming a Science](https://www.superdatascience.com/data-science-becoming-a-science/)


### Big Data
The general trend of more and more data, due to the high capacity of modern computing and a highly digitally interactive society. It is what makes data science such a in demand profession, with tendecies for more and more data available in the coming years.
While world-changing and extremelly interesting for a data scientist, it also raises a lot of problem such as surveillance and privacy concerns.


### Data Mining
The process of extracting usefull and interesing information/patterns from data. The term could represent the more direct, [associate rules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apriori_algorithm) approach or the intersection with machine learning, involving problems such as classification, regression, clustering, anomaly detection, etc


### Machine Learning
As opposed to more general term, artificial intelligence, machine learning is viewed as a more hands on and praticall discipline, not focused on necessarily basing itself on human inteligence, but applying techniques where a computer system can learn very specific tasks.


# Extra Readings
Only 1 extra reading for this video, but quite a extensive one, the paper [Statistical Learning Theory: Models, Concepts, and Results by Ulrike von Luxburg and Bernhard Schoelkopf](https://arxiv.org/pdf/0810.4752.pdf). It serves as a introduction to SLT, going through the general idea and formulation of the field, focused on the binary classification problem. My notes on it can be found [here]({% link _ml/2018-11-16-slt-introduction.md %})
