---
title: "Participation and Honorable Mention USP International Symposium
of Undergraduate Research"
date: 2018-10-27
tags: [machine learning, research, mosquitos]
header:
  image: "/images/icmc.jpg"
categories: research
excerpt: "Details about the paper written and the Honorable mentioned received at the 26th USP International Symposium
of Undergraduate Research"

--- 

# SIICUSP

The University of São Paulo's International Symposium of Undergraduate Research (SIICUSP) is an annual event in which undergraduate students communicate the results of their research projects, developed at USP or other universities. It also aims at helping students improve their academic research skills and at fostering the interaction of researchers from different areas and levels in order to promote collaboration and multidisciplinary research. 

Since 2014, SIICUSP is held in two stages. In the first stage, each School, or group of Schools, hosts their own events, with participants of their subject areas. The best evaluated students of each School are invited to a second event, in which they have the opportunity to present their projects again, this time in a multidisciplinary context. Students from universities abroad also present their projects, selected by committees from their institutions.

# 26th SIICUSP

After partaking in stage 1, I was selected to present my research on optimizing classifier parameters for insect datasets at the international stage. Afterwards I was one of the students awarded a [Honorable Mention]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link download/siicusp/mencao.pdf %}) for the quality of the paper, poster and presentation.

A copy of the paper in English can be found [here]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link download/siicusp/final_version_english.pdf %}) and of the English poster [here]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link download/siicusp/poster_siicusp.pdf %}). There is also a Portuguese translations of the paper [here]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link download/siicusp/final_version_port.pdf %}).

